developing a kinetic scheme for a small ester, which is a potentially important candidate to represent the longer chain molecules in the real biodiesel fuel, namely methylbutanoate. A compact reaction scheme is derived for methylbutanoate from an existing detailed mechanism, revised based on newer experimental measurements and theoretical rate constant calculations, and comprehensively assessed for its component kinetic description. Thereafter, a constrained optimization approach is used to propose a surrogate to represent biodiesel fuel, consisting of methylbutanoate and n-dodecane, and assessed thoroughly (Fig. below). This work serves as our first step towards the development of a compact reaction scheme for a biodiesel surrogate which will be coupled with combustion studies to investigate the use of biodiesels and its blends with diesel in CI engines. 

Addition to oxygenates to diesel fuel has been found to reduce soot emissions. Nonetheless, the resulting changes in the extinction and auto-ignition characteristics of the fuel mixture have not yet been fully understood. Considering two important oxygenates, dimethyl ether and methanol, we undertook a fundamental analysis, which reveals that blending small amounts of oxygenates with diesel increases its resistance to extinction, which can be of use in applications such as burners, furnaces and pre-vaporizers. We also find that the auto-ignition characteristics are not altered much due to blending. This study suggests that in the presence of oxygenate, a combustion system can be made more stable even at higher strain rates and at the same time operate with reduced emissions. We are in process of confirming our observations with an experimental study in a counterflow configuration

Study of kinetics of methylmethacrylate, which is a monomer of PMMA that is used in construction sector, is relevant to fire research. A compact reaction model to describe its oxidation is being developed and validated against fundamental experimental datasets obtained in canonical configurations, which isolate the kinetics from the flow related complexities. 

Computational studies of combustion in engines are typically performed by modeling the real fuel as a surrogate mixture of various hydrocarbons. Aromatic species are crucial components in these surrogate mixtures. In this work, a consistent chemical mechanism to predict the high temperature combustion characteristics of toluene, styrene, ethylbenzene, 1,3-dimethylbenzene (m-xylene), and 1-methylnaphthalene is presented. The present work builds on a detailed chemical mechanism for high temperature oxidation of smaller hydrocarbons developed by Blanquart et al. [Combust. Flame 156 (2009) 588–607]. The base mechanism has been validated extensively in the previous work and is now extended to include reactions of various substituted aromatic compounds. The reactions representing oxidation of the aromatic species are taken from the literature or are derived from those of the lower aromatics or the corresponding alkane species. The chemical mechanism is validated against plug flow reactor data, ignition delay times, species profiles measured in shock-tube experiments, and laminar burning velocities. The combustion characteristics predicted by the chemical model compare well with those available from experiments for the different aromatic species under consideration.

Using accurate multi-component diffusion treatment in numerical combustion studies remains formidable due to the computational cost associated with solving for diffusion velocities. To obtain the diffusion veloc- ities, for low density gases, one needs to solve the Stefan–Maxwell equations along with the zero diffusion  ux criteria, which scales as O(N3), when solved exactly. In this paper, we propose an accurate, fast, direct and robust algorithm to compute multi-component diffusion velocities. We also take into account the Soret effect, while computing the multi-component diffusion velocities. To our knowledge, this is the  rst provably accurate algorithm (the solution can be obtained up to an arbitrary degree of precision) scaling at a compu- tational complexity of O(N) in  nite precision. The key idea involves leveraging the fact that the matrix of the reciprocal of the binary diffusivities, V, is low rank, with its rank being independent of the number of species involved. The low rank representation of matrix V is computed in a fast manner at a computational complexity of O(N) and the Sherman–Morrison–Woodbury formula is used to solve for the diffusion veloc- ities at a computational complexity of O(N). Rigorous proofs and numerical benchmarks illustrate the low rank property of the matrix V and scaling of the algorithm.

Surrogate fuels consisting of a mixture of well-studied hydrocarbons are often used to model real fuels in typical combus- tion studies. A major challenge, however, is the capability to design compact and reliable kinetic models that capture all the specificities of the simpler, but still multi-component surrogates. This task is further complicated by the diverse nature of the hydrocarbons commonly considered as potential surrogate components, since they typically result in large detailed reaction schemes. Towards addressing this challenge, the present work proposes a single, compact, and reliable chemical mechanism, that can accurately describe the oxidation of a wide range of fuels, which are important components of surrogate fuels. A well-characterized mechanism appropriate for the oxidation of smaller hydrocarbon species [Blan- quart et al., Combust. Flame (2009)], as well as several substituted aromatic species and n-dodecane, well suited as a base to model surrogates, has now been extended to describe the oxidation of methylcyclohexane, a representative of the cyclic alkane class, which is often used in jet fuel surro- gates. To ensure compactness of the kinetic scheme, a short mechanism for the low to high temperature oxidation of methylcyclohexane is extracted from the detailed scheme of Pitz et al. and integrated in a systematic way into the previous model. Rate coefficient changes based on recent recommendations from literature, and an additional concerted elimination pathway important at moderate to low temperatures are introduced to the resulting chemical mechanism, which improve the model predictions. Extensive validation of the revised kinetic model is performed using a wide range of experimental conditions and data sets.

Using surrogate fuels in lieu of real fuels is an appealing concept for combustion studies. A major limitation however, is the capability to design compact and reliable kinetic models that capture all the specificities of the simpler, but still multi-component surrogates. This task is further complicated by the fairly large nature of the hydrocarbons commonly considered as potential surrogate components, since they typically result in large detailed reaction schemes. Towards addressing this challenge, the present work proposes a single, compact, and reliable chemical mechanism, that can accurately describe the oxidation of a wide range of fuels, which are important components of surrogate fuels. A well-characterized mechanism appropriate for the oxidation of smaller hydrocarbon species [Blanquart et al., Combust. Flame (2009)], and several substituted aromatic species [Narayanaswamy et al., Combust. Flame (2010)], ideally suited as a base to model surrogates, has now been extended to describe the oxidation of n-dodecane, a representative of the paraffin class, which is often used in diesel and jet fuel surrogates. To ensure compactness of the kinetic scheme, a short mechanism for the low to high temperature oxidation of n-dodecane is extracted from the detailed scheme of Sarathy et al. [Combust. Flame (2011)] and integrated in a systematic way into the base model. Rate changes based on recent rate recommendations from literature are introduced to the resulting chemical mechanism in a consistent manner, which improve the model predictions. Extensive validation of the revised kinetic model is performed using a wide range of experimental conditions and data sets.

An alternative way to formulate transportation fuels surrogates using model pre- dictions of gas-phase combustion targets is explored and compared to conventional approaches. Given a selection of individual fuel components, a multi-component chemical mechanism describing their oxidation kinetics, and a database of exper- imental measurements for key combustion quantities such as ignition delay times and laminar burning velocities, the optimal fractional amount of each fuel is de- termined as the one yielding the smallest error between experiments and model predictions. Using a previously studied three-component jet fuel surrogate con- taining n-dodecane, methyl-cyclohexane, and m-xylene as case study, this article investigates in a systematic manner how the surrogate composition affects model predictions for ignition delay time and laminar burning velocities over a wide range of temperature, pressure, and stoichiometry conditions, and compares the results to existing surrogate formulation techniques, providing new insights on how to define surrogates for simulation purposes. Finally, an optimization algorithm is described to accelerate the identification of optimal surrogate compositions in this context.

Surrogate fuels are often used in place of real fuels in computational combustion studies. However, many different choices of hydrocarbons to make up surrogate mixtures have been reported in the literature, particularly for jet fuels. To identify the best choice of surrogate components, the capabilities of different surrogate mixtures in emulating the combustion kinetic behavior of the real fuel must be examined. To allow extensive assessment of the combustion behavior of these surrogate mixtures against detailed experimental measurements for real fuels, accurate and compact kinetic models are most essential. To realize this goal, a flexible and evolutive component library framework is proposed here, which allows mixing and matching between surrogate components to obtain short chemical mechanisms with only the necessary kinetics for the desired surrogate mixtures. The idea is demonstrated using an extensively validated multi- component reaction mechanism developed in stages [Blanquart et al., Combust. Flame (2009), Narayanaswamy et al., Combust. Flame (2010, 2014, 2015)], thanks to its compact size and modular assembly. To display the applicability of the component library framework, (i) a jet fuel surrogate consisting of n-dodecane, methylcyclohexane, and m-xylene, whose kinetics are described in the multi-component chemical mechanism is defined, (ii) a chemical model for this surrogate mixture is derived from the multi-component chemical mechanism using the component library framework, and (iii) the predictive capabilities of this jet fuel surrogate and the associated chemical model are assessed extensively from low to high temperatures in well studied experimental configurations, such as shock tubes, premixed flames, and flow reactors.